Thanks for clicking. Canada's banking regulator is warning the big banks against using rubber stamp appraisals and as a result RBC is being less obvious about it. This according to a new report coming down from Reuters. Yeah, as we're all well aware, while RBC used to flaunt that it was breaking the rules, there was a meeting with the banking regulator back in October where they were warned against breaking the rules and as a result now they're being less flagrant. In this story, as we'll see, is pretty nuts. While the public knew RBC was doing this a year ago, RBC had been doing it since at least the year before that. Of gets around to warning them about a year and a half later, and RBC changes its website. That's better. >> So, what I want to do today is go over these blanket appraisals, take a look at OSI's warnings to the big banks, as well as RBC's response, and then discuss who is really in charge in Canada's banking industry. >> Want to guess? We do have a great big week next week with Canada's inflation data set to be released on Monday and the Bank of Canada set to make its next policy rate announcement on Wednesday with a press conference held thereafter. And we'll obviously have an update out on both on this channel. Make sure you click like and subscribe if you want to get those updates. But for now, let's get into these blanket appraisals. Onto these blanket appraisals very briefly. As Toronto's condo market continues to crash, so too do its values. And with that, those who have purchased pre-construction condos, those who purchased condos to be built four, 5, 6 years ago, are having trouble getting financing as their condos are no longer worth their purchase price. >> Oh, that never happens. And that obviously creates a problem as these condos come to completion. As they're getting ready to close, buyers can't line up financing. Those condos can't close, people get sued, etc., etc. Unless that is, those buyers of those condos went with RBC, which uses blanket appraisals, where they just appraise the property at the purchase price, not the current value, and you're off to the races. So, for example, say you purchase that pre-construction condo at the peak of the market for 1.6 6 million. By the time it comes to close, it's now worth $1.2 million. You put 20% down on that $1.62 million. And RBC gives you a mortgage for 1,296 grand on a condo now worth 1.2 million. You now owe $100,000 more on your condo than it's worth, but at least you didn't get sued. >> You're getting one way or the other. And RBC does this because there is a law against lending at 80% loan to value or higher. So technically by law, RBC is not allowed to loan more than 80% of a home's value. So if a home is worth $100,000, RBC can only lend to a max of 80,000. And as such, RBC gets around that law by saying that the condo is worth more than it is by using the original purchase price rather than the current market value. And no one's the wiser, which is, yeah, sort of the case. RBC has been doing this for quite some time. One of Toronto's developers had a realtor appreciation event in March of 2024 where RBC advertised blanket appraisals across five condo towers. Now, I'm not sure if you've ever been to one of these real estate industry events. I certainly wasn't at that one, but however cringey you're picturing it, it's worse than that. The hot shot of Ontario residential real estate get told how to bypass the regulations. About one in 10 understand what the speaker is saying. that one of 10 explains it to the other nine after the presentation and afterwards they all bro out. >> WE'RE PLAYING NOW, BOYS. LET'S CELEBRATE. >> Regardless though, that was 2 years ago that RBC was giving presentations on its underwater lending. It was last year that the Toronto Star ran an expose on those blanket appraisals and then OSI doesn't bring it up until October of 2025. And even then, from what's being reported by Reuters, the banking regulator simply raised the issue to the big banks that the 80% loan to value ratio could be breached when using these blanket appraisals. And that was it. That's the extent of it. As though RBC wasn't fully aware that loans exceeding 80% of the property's value would be in breach of the Bank Act. So armed with this knowledge under the surveillance of Canada's banking regulator, what does RBC do to change these risky practices? It changes its website in October, offering firm approvals to match the closing date provided by the builder. Once approved, you stay approved. Fast forward to now, they offer mortgage approvals based on the closing date provided by the builder. And told Reuters, it's working closely with the regulator to make sure it meets their expectations. And I think this is gaslighting, right? Saying one thing while doing another when it's obvious what you're doing. When I was coming up, we called it something else. >> You are speaking to me. But there really is no reason for RBC to say anything else. No reason for RBC to do anything besides change its website as OSI really doesn't have any additional comments on the story. And I think the story tells us what we already know that Canada's biggest bank can do whatever Canada's biggest bank wants. And I'd imagine Canada's next biggest bank can do whatever that bank wants as well. Though we already have ample evidence of that. And what this entire episode tells me from RBC doing the blanket appraisals in the first place to it being public knowledged for two years to OIE warning them about it and them doing basically nothing is that any hopes of a mortgage meltdown, any hopes that the authorities will let the real estate industry crash are in error. And the authorities very much know who butters their bread and whether the bailout comes in an allout financial package or it comes by looking the other way. Looking the other way, while the banks take on massively high amounts of risky debt, the result is the same. The government is picking winners and losers. And the winners first and foremost is RBC. As we saw in that expose from the Toronto Star last year, it was strongly strongly suggested that RBC was engaging in these practices because they were the ones that financed the developments in the first place. If X number of condos don't close, then that project fails and RBC has financed that project, then RBC stands to lose tens of millions of dollars. As a result, evidently the banking regulator looks the other way while RBC bails itself out. And then when press changes its website to keep everything real nice. Second, the big winner, the real estate industry as a whole and anyone that owns a condo. Anyone that owns property really, as we can only imagine what the property market would look like if the banking regulator did its job. If RBC wasn't allowed to take on millions upon millions of dollars of underwater mortgages, >> they wouldn't. >> And the losers, well, most obviously, those banks that didn't jump into a great big obvious Ponzi scheme. Is the Financial Post ever right about like anything? >> They wouldn't. Regardless, yeah, those banks that didn't jump in didn't finance those developments like RBC did and are not being recipients of a bailout. They're not getting that blind eye from OSI. You're teaching the banks to engage in riskier lending, provide riskier loans, and if push comes to shove, OSI will look the other way. >> It's true. >> And then finally, the other losers, the biggest losers, whether they realize it or not, is everyone else. As the government is teaching the market, it's teaching the real estate industry that if push comes to shove, the government will be there to bail them out. The government will be picking winners and losers. They're allowing unlimited upside when the market's moving the right way, but putting a floor on the downside. They're inviting more risky behavior, which they are 100% going to get, which will invite more bailouts, which will invite more risky behavior, and on and on it goes. Yes. And I've said on this channel numerous times that the government will not allow to the extent that they can control it, the real estate market to completely crash to zero. It will not allow real estate to fall to a certain number. And there's any number of policy levers that they can pull to prevent that. Interest rates, stress tests, amortizations, tax cuts, and right now the most recent that we've seen is the big blind eye. And that's what those minutes from OSI as reported by Reuters show. We've all known this was happening for the past few years. OSI even discusses it with the banks. And as far as we can tell, RBC is still doing it. They're just not being so flippant. They're just not being so flagrant. And on and on we go because the powers that be don't want the market to look the way it should look if the market were allowed to behave on its own. We will obviously continue to track this and other government bailouts to the self-starting entrepreneurs that constitute the real estate industry on this channel. Make sure you click like and subscribe if you want to get those updates.
